# IATI Registry Local Development Environment

## Summary

 Product  |  IATI Registry Local Development Instance
--- | ---
Description | The (new) IATI Registry is a CIAM system using a CRM ([SuiteCRM](https://github.com/salesagility/SuiteCRM)) to store IATI organisation and dataset information, and an identity service ([WSO2](https://github.com/wso2/product-is)).  This repository contains various files to spin up a local development instance of the (new) IATI Registry and to generate fake data to put into the Registry for development and testing.  Currently this just contains the CRM component. 
Website | None 
Related | To test the registry you will need to install the [IATI Registry SuiteCRM Extension](https://github.com/IATI/iati-registry-suitecrm-extension).<br />To interact with the SuiteCRM API using Python there is a Python library: [IATI SuiteCRM Python Library](https://github.com/IATI/iati-registry-libsuitecrm). 
Documentation | Rest of README.md
Technical Issues | [GitHub issues page](https://github.com/IATI/iati-registry-suitecrm-extension/issues) 
Support | [IATI Support Website](https://iatistandard.org/en/guidance/get-support/) 

## High-level requirements

* Docker.
* Docker Compose.
* Python (for running the faking tooling)

## Overview

The `docker-compose.yaml` configures a CRM service and the database service that the CRM needs:

1. `iati-dev-registry-crm`: [SuiteCRM](https://suitecrm.com/) is the IATI CRM.
2. `iati-dev-registry-crm-db`: [MariaDB](https://mariadb.org/) is the store for the IATI CRM.

At the moment the persistent data storage has been redirected to a local folder rather than use a Docker volume (see environment variables: `DB_CRM_LOCAL_PATH`, `CRM_LOCAL_PATH`).  This is to make it easier to inspect the file system during development.  It's envisaged that they would be rolled back into Docker volumes at some later stage.

To fill the registry with mocked data, the there is a tool called `fakeiati.py` to generate a corpus of fake IATI data.  These are generated as CSV files that can be imported into SuiteCRM (with a few caveats).

## Getting started

### Starting the Registry

From the command line issue:

```
cp .env.example .env
docker compose up
```

Then you will need to fetch the [IATI Registry extension for SuiteCRM](https://github.com/IATI/iati-registry-suitecrm-extension) and install the zip file via the *Module Loader* section in the *Admin* section.  If you are opening your instance to the outside world it is recommended to change the default passwords in `.env`.

### Generating fake data

The details of the model used to generate fake data is [described in detail later in this README](#iati-faker) but to generate data from the command line we need to install the relevant dependencies with `pip install -r requirements.txt`.  Then run the `fakeiati.py` tool.  For example, the following command will generate 10 organisations (with datasets, people and actions) and save the data in CSV files that can be imported into SuiteCRM.  The default number of files that are generated is 100 and CSV files for SuiteCRM are generated by default.

```
python fakeiati.py -n 10
```

The full list of arguments to this tool are:

```
usage: FakeIATI [-h] [-n int] [-s int] [--no-suitecrm bool] [-p str] [--safe-emails bool] [--safe-urls bool] [--fake-uuids bool]

Generate a fake corpus of IATI data for development and testing

options:
  -h, --help          show this help message and exit
  -n int              Number of organisation to generate
  -s int              Seed for the random number generator
  --no-suitecrm bool  Don't generate CSV files for bulk import into SuiteCRM
  -p str              Filename of a model parameter TOML file
  --safe-emails bool  Generate safe email addresses
  --safe-urls bool    Generate safe urls
  --fake-uuids bool   Generate clearly fake UUIDs for records
``` 

The `--safe-emails` and `--safe-urls` options will only generate from domains such as `example.org` to avoid the risk of traffic being sent to real URLs or email addresses in testing, and `--fake-uuids` will generate UUIDs with the first 8 characters set to a string to facilitate testing.

### Configuration

The services are configured using environment variables in `.env` and an example is provided `.env.example`.  If this service is
to be open to the outside world it is recommended to change the passwords.  The passwords that need to be set are:

* `DB_CRM_PASS`: password to access the CRM database.
* `DB_CRM_ROOT_PASSWORD`: root password for the CRM database.
* `CRM_PASS`: password for the admin account of the CRM.

### Development

#### Checking and linting

The `fakeiati` tool and `iati_fake_model` is setup to be linted with `isort` and `black` and checked with `flake8`.  Configurations are stored in `pyproject.toml`.  To use these linters and checkers you will first need to install the development dependencies:

```
pip install -r requirements_dev.txt
```

 #### Adding new dependencies

New dependencies are added to `pyproject.toml`.  Once these have been added `requirements.txt` and/or `requirements_dev.txt` need to be regenerated.  With:

```
pip-compile --output-file=requirements.txt --strip-extras
```

and/or

```
pip-compile --extra=dev --output-file=requirements_dev.txt --strip-extras
```

#### Versioning

The version of the faking tool is set in `pyproject.toml`.  When making updates, set the version to an appropriate value.

## IATI Faker

To aid development, the Python code in this repository can generate a fake set of IATI data for import into the Registry.  This is not designed to be a highly detailed statistical model of the organisations, people and dataset records in the IATI corpus.  For example:

* Effects such as the the distribution of number of users (*People*) per publisher (Organisation) and the distribution of publishers (*Organisations*) from different countries are modelled, no attempt is made to model multi-variable effects, such as where the number of users may depend on the country that the organisation is based in.
* The growth of the corpus over time is highly simplified, for example, the number organisations as a function of time is not modelled.

We also do not seek to model detailed and specific edge cases, as it is thought that these deserve case-by-case attention with specific synthetic model datasets for import - which, in any case, might be missed by such a large model.  This model is designed to generate large volumes of data for testing and to capture the following properties for UAT and migration testing purposes:

* Reporting Organisations are created at some point in time and have administrators, editors and members who start at different times.
* Reporting Organisations create datasets at different points in time.
* Datasets are updated at various points and not always by the same person.
* People can leave organisations.
* Organisation data can be updated at various points and not always by the same person.

The model is deterministic as long as the same random number seed is used for each run (controlable from the command line).  The model is configured using a `.toml` file.

Note that the language around *People* and *Organisations* differs from that in CKAN, the fake data is designed to be exported in a format similar to what can be obtained using the CKAN API.

### Model

Generally the model considers an *Organisation*, its *People* and *Datasets* to be in a silo.  The exception to this is when there are People who are members of multiple Organisations.  These are generated separately.

The model only generates Organisations, People and Datasets between two dates that are specified using the `start_date` and `end_date` parameters in the TOML configuration.

#### Model steps

The first step in the model is to generate People that might be members of multiple Organisations.  The number of these is generated in proportion to the number of organisations as controlled by `users.multi_org_users`.

Then, for each organisation we generate, we produce a basic organisation that has one admin person and randomly generated data.  If randomly decide that this will be a reporting org (with a chance selected by `reporting_org_chance`) then we carry out the following steps to create a reporting organisation, otherwise we are complete.

1. Grow the organisation up to its final size.  At each step we calculate the date they joined the organisation and randomly select a *capacity*.  If this user is an editor, and we randomly decide that this will be an editor that works across multiple organisations (`orgs.by_final_size.multi_org_editor`), then we simply add the person from the multi-org person pool.  Otherwise we generate a new person and add them to the organisation.
2. Churn the organisation, accounting for people leaving the organisation at randomly determined times, to be replaced by new people.  This doesn't apply to multi-organisation editors.
3. Create some actions for updates to the organisation metadata.
4. Create an organisation XML dataset.
5. Create activity XML datasets.

#### Organisations
Organisations are created at some time $t_{0,\mathrm{org}}$ with a single admin person.  The number of people in the organisation then exponentially grows up to some maximum number of people.

$$
N_\mathrm{people} = N_{\mathrm{max}} \left[ 1 - \exp\left(-\frac{t-t_{0,\mathrm{org}}}{\tau}\right) \right]
$$

where $t$ is the time at any point after organisation creation and $\tau$ is the timescale over which the organisation grows, a larger number means the organisation grows more slowly.  The growth timescale is drawn from a uniform distribution with minimum and maximum values set by the `orgs.growth_timescale_min` and `orgs.growth_timescale_max` parameters.  The maximum final size of an organisation, $N_\mathrm{max}$, is determined by a weighted distribution controlled by `orgs.by_final_size.sizes` and `orgs.by_final_size.weights`.  The organisation creation date, $t_{0,\mathrm{org}}$ is drawn from a uniform distribution between user-selectable start and end dates.

**Note** that it is possible for an organisation with $N_\mathrm{people}=11$ to be created a day before the end date of the model and so all the people in the organisation will all be added in the last day of the model.

Other random data, such as addresses, email addresses, phone numbers, text strings, organisation names, names of people and son on, is generated using [Faker](https://faker.readthedocs.io/en/master/.

* We generate addresses, phone and fax numbers with chances controlled by `orgs.address_chance`, `orgs.phone_chance` and `orgs.fax_chance`.
* Whether an organisation is a primary or secondary reporter is randomly selected according to the weights in `orgs.source_types`.
* The country for the organisation is randomly selected according to the weights in `orgs.countries`.
* The type of organisation is randomly selected according to the weights in `orgs.types`.
* The default license used by an organisation is randomly selected according to the weights in `orgs.licenses`.

#### People

When a person is created they are automatically setup with a leaving date.  This is controlled with *waiting times* specified in `users.leaving_waiting_times` given separately (in days) for admin, editor and member capacities.  The exact date is determined by randomly selecting a number of days from an exponential distribution parameterised by the reciprocal of the waiting time (to give a rate at which people leave organisations).  Whether or not a person has signed up to the IATI mailing list is determined by the `users.mailing_list_chance` parameter.

### Datasets

#### Organisation

Some organisations won't have an organisation dataset and this is controlled through the `datasets.org.has_org_file_chance` parameter.

#### Activity

The number of activity datasets per organisation is drawn from a complicated composite distribution.  First we select between 0, 1 or 2-or-more datasets, with the weights in `datasets.activity.num_weight_zero`, `datasets.activity.num_weight_one` and `datasets.activity.num_weight_twoormore`.  If 2-or-more is selected then the actual number is generated from a Pareto distribution that is parameterised by `datasets.activity.num_pareto_x_m` and `datasets.activity.num_pareto_alpha` and gives a power-law distribution where generally a larger number of datasets is less likely.

### Actions

Five types of actions are modelled:

1. Creation of organisations.
2. Creation of datasets.
3. Changes to organisation metadata.
4. Changes to dataset metadata.
5. Changes to an activity dataset URL.

Creation actions are associated with a randomly selected member of the organisation (admin or editor) and making sure they were a member of the organisation at the time the dataset was created.

In the change cases, the number of actions to be performed is modelled as a Poisson distribution with a rate determined from the period that a given record (organisation, org dataset or activity dataset) has been active in the corpus, combined with an average update period.  For example, if there are 50 days between the dataset creation date and the end date in the model, and the average update period is thought to be 25 days, then the rate is 50/25 meaning that we'd expect (on average) 2 changes in that period of time.

#### Changes to organisation metadata

The average update period is stored in the `orgs.update_period` parameter.  Once a random number of changes has been determined the model:

1. Selects a change date from a uniform distribution between the organisation creation date and the end date of the model.
2. Randomly selects a member of the organisation (admin or editor) to have made the change (making sure they were a member of the organisation at the time the change was made).
3. Creates an action with a randomly selected user agent (tooling that was used to make the change) - the weights for these are controlled with `actions.user_agents`.

#### Changes to datasets

The average update period for organisation and activity datasets is stored in the `datasets.org.update_period` and `datasets.activity.update_period` parameters, respectively.  For each one a random number of changes is determined and then the model:

1. Selects a change date from a uniform distribution between the dataset creation date and the end date of the model.
2. Randomly selects a member of the organisation (admin or editor) to have made the change (making sure they were a member of the organisation at the time the change was made).
3. Creates an action with a randomly selected user agent (tooling that was used to make the change) - the weights for these are controlled with `actions.user_agents`.  Organisation datasets only record `update_metadata` actions, but for activity datasets we also allow the URL to be updated, and this is randomly determined using `datasets.activity.url_update_chance`, if the URL is updated then the `update_url` action is recorded, otherwise we record `update_metadata`.


## License
    This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
    it under the terms of the GNU Affero General Public License as published by
    the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
    (at your option) any later version.
    
    This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
    but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
    MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
    GNU Affero General Public License for more details.
    
    You should have received a copy of the GNU Affero General Public License
    along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

